# The Mass Amateurisation of Content Creation and Where it Leaves Professional Content Creators. 

The introduction of personal computers and the internet has lead to an increase in the consumption of media. Technology enables us to consume more by providing greater choice. Users could for the first time really choose what they wanted to view. Niche interests could find audiences due to the increase of a shared user base. Unlike traditional media sources these obscure pieces of content could sit and wait to be discovered, they didn't have to rely on attracting an audience at a set time. But the truly interesting thing is that this audience could also be the ones that created their own content.

The same technological devices that enables more consumption of media also enables the users to create their own media. Computers help level the playing field between the professionals and amateurs. Tools for creation such as Photoshop, Adobe After Effects and Final Cut are easily available to the masses thanks to digital distribution of software. These professional grade tools help improve the quality of amateur work. Combine this with internet access to an almost endless library of online tutorials and the distinction between amateur and professional can quickly become blurred. This blurring of the divide is further exaggerated by the changes technology have lead to content delivery methods. Anyone can own a website and host their own content and many websites are built around this idea of user generated content. 

Youtube, will host user generated videos and even pay a share of the advertising money to the creator. Wikipedia hosts a community generated encyclopaedia that has been written without hiring a professional writer. Ushahidi is an open source project that enables people to report news via email or SMS text message. Versions exist that have tracked trapped survivors after environmental disasters, the outbreaks of bird flu and violence after the elections in Kenya. This crowd sourcing of content, wether is be user generated or just user reported, has become the backbone to large portions of the internet. It's ideas and influence have been used across various different fields. So what effect does this user generated content have on professional content creators? How does it change the role they play in creating?

# Traditional Content Creation

Traditionally if you wanted to publish any form of content you would have to be willing to travel a long road that was often guarded by several gatekeepers. Every so often though a technology appears that seems to reduce the length of the journey or to remove a few of those gatekeepers. One of the earlier obvious leaps in technology is the invention of moveable type and the Gutenberg press in the 1440's. This leap allows the sharing of content through a reduction in the money and time needed to produce a book. At first the books printed are the traditional classics and religious texts. But soon after we see a shift and new books are written and printed, the barrier to entry had been reduced and large amounts of books could be printed instead of having to wait for books to be handwritten by monks. 

The removal of monks as gatekeepers of publication also had a knock on effect on the type of books that could be printed. By taking away religious intervention people were able to print works that went against the bible. For example this period saw the invention of pornographic books and the scientific journal, yes in that order, for example. But the removal of one gate keeper lead to the introduction of another. A publisher. While the cost to produce books had been reduced it was still expensive, so the role of a publisher was invented. They acted as gatekeepers by only investing in books they believed would be profitable. This became the standard model for content creation. It can be seen in films, television and the music industry. They controlled what the public could see and experience.

People have always tried to bypass these gatekeepers though. It's a natural human behaviour to share and express ourselves. The punk movement in the 1970's gave birth to the zine. A self published limited edition magazine type publication. Zines were often hand made and distributed to friends. Their rise coincided with the introduction of the photocopier which enabled cheap copies to be made in modest size batches of 10's to a 1000. This introduction of technology gave people a way to subvert the usual gatekeepers and to spread their own ideas and messages. We see the same thing happen again in the late 80's with the emergence of commercial internet service providers.

# The New Model

The internet shifted the old models. It removed the gatekeepers and enabled self publishing of all forms of content with very few barriers to entry. It removed the old model of one person talking to many and replaced it with many talking to many. A publisher wasn't needed. Anyone can self publish. A mouse click is all that stands in the way between being published on the internet. Anyone can own a blog and publish their writings on it. Video can be uploaded and shared with help from youtube. Flickr fills the same role for photographs and audio is covered by SoundCloud. Almost any form of content can be uploaded and shared via these services or their competitors. In the majority of cases for free. 

The tools needed to produce this content have also become easily available. DSLR cameras reduced the barriers to entry in high quality photography. HD cameras can be found on most smartphones. The Adobe suite of creative programs can be purchased by anyone and will run on the average home pc. Editing digital film clips can be done with tools that come with Windows or OS X and professional grade programs can still be purchased. The gap between professional and amateur in terms of equipment and software has been drastically narrowed. Couple this with the barrier to publishing, effectively being removed and the difference between amateur and professional is blurred. 

If equipment is removed as a difference what is the difference between the amateur and professional? Experience? Experience isn't something one can learn easily but knowledge can be gained quickly. Online tutorials, guide books, internet forums all provide short cuts to knowledge. Professionals will share their tips and tricks and are even willing to help you out with problems if you get lucky on a forum. This knowledge base is available to all (perhaps could mention cost reduction of the knowledge). The internet removed the secrecy that surrounds professional content creation. Tricks and tips are freely shared, gone is the mysticism of the creator. The benefits of experience can be passed on in the form of knowledge. This knowledge can be collectively pooled and freely drawn from much more easily thanks to the endless storage capacity of the internet. By sharing this knowledge and lending people experience the gap between professional and amateur is reduced. So in theory the difference between amateur and professional work should be negligible. 

But this isn't always the case. Professional work often does outclass amateur content. They have put in the hours to truly become an expert at what they do and understand the details of their craft. But does this really matter? There are times that amateur work is often preferred. Take for example a birthday card. What would you prefer a professionally printed mass produced card or one from a close friend or family member that had been lovingly handcrafted? You would take the handmade one because it means more. There is a personal connection between the creator and you, and this adds extra emotional value to the work. By using social networks, such as Facebook and twitter amateur content creators can connect to their audience and engage in conversation. These conversations can influence the content they put out. Wether it be technical advice or a personal response to their content. Possibly the largest example of this put into practice is Youtube.

# Youtube - Case Study One.

Several sites on the internet allow users to upload and share video. Of this Youtube.com is the most well recognised and most frequently visited. It is the 3rd most visited site on the internet and is visited by 30% of all internet users. For every minute that passes youtube users upload 60 hours of video content. Thats over 2 years worth of video a day. The majority of this is amateur content. And a large chunk of this is meaningless fluff content. Videos of a childs first step or their role in a school play hold emotional value. This kind of personal content isn't meant to rival a professionals work. It's meant simply to be shared with friends and family. Yet the most viewed video on youtube is one such video. Charlie bit my finger - Again! has a staggering 489,131,893 views, at the time of writing, on youtube and puts in comfortably in first place as the most viewed video of Youtube. 

Charlie bit my finger - Again! is shot on a handheld shaky cam and is just a funny family moment between two children. It has over 150 million more views than the 2nd place video which is a professional shot music video for Adele's song Rolling in the Deep. So how can this handheld shaky cam video be viewed so many more times than this professional shot music video? The Charlie video doesn't need to have a professional quality to succeed. It just needed to be good enough that it provided an enjoyable viewing experience, which it does. No fancy special effects or high quality cameras were needed to capture a funny moment between brothers, just an everyday amateur camera. The content then spread virally, thanks to it's funny nature and it's cute factor, through social networks. Amateur content doesn't have to be as high quality as professional work to compete. It just has to be good enough that it's enjoyable to watch. The tools and technology are now cheap enough and easily available enough to allow that goal to be reached by almost anyone. Youtube is just the publishing platform for this kind of video content.

Youtube also works to encourage this kind of content creation. At the start of most videos are short commercial ads. These ads help fund the cost of running the site. But a portion of this ad money can also go towards the content creator. If a video reaches certain thresholds, usually view count, then Youtube will pay the creator a share of this ad money. This has lead to a wide variety of homegrown shows on youtube and the birth of youtube stars. These youtube stars now create content for youtube full time and are compensated for their time with a cut of the Youtube advertising money. These professional Youtubers often have fairly large audience bases of around 100,000 to a few million. So the amount of people that see their content isn't too far off that of an average TV show. These amateur content creators have become a form of professional themselves. They create quality content that is viewed by many and manage an audience. They leverage social networking tools such as Facebook and twitter to connection and engage in a two way dialogue with their audience. The gather opinions on their last video, seek ideas for new ones or just build up a bond between their content and the audience. All things a real television network hires armies of trained professionals to do as well. Yet the average Youtuber does all this with no publisher and often no forma training. Their content also remains unfiltered by a publisher and gives them one advantage over traditional television media. They are far more willing to take risks and experiment with their content. 

While Youtube does have the sorts of content that tries to compete and emulate traditional television content such as cooking shows and fashion shows. It also hosts a wide range of content thanks to the fact its content is user generated. There are shows and videos on Youtube that would never likely receive a chance to be on TV. EpicMealTime, is a twisted cooking show where a bunch of drunk angry Canadians try and cook the most heart attack inducing dishes, while consuming large amounts of bacon and alcohol. FPSRussia, blows up zombie clowns with exotic weaponry while putting on a fake Russian accent and acting like a cheesy action movie hero. FreddieW creates elaborate special effects heavy short films. All this content covers a wide and diverse audience and more importantly covers areas that traditional television media can't reach. Because the cost of attracting these niche audiences can't be reclaimed by traditional revenue streams. No one is stopping a Youtuber from the production of obscure content. Anyone one is free to carry out any video idea they have and to simple upload it. EpicMealTime started out with a simple video of them putting a Big Mac on top of a pizza, today it is a full time job, uploading weekly videos to Youtube and managing a range of merchandise. By giving people a platform for amateur to create and publish on a large scale, Youtube can launch new genres of content and blur the difference between amateur and professional content creators.

Youtube streams 3 billion videos daily with the average viewer spending around 15-20 minutes watching Youtube a day. Compare this to the average time spent watching TV a day, which is 4 and a half hours with viewership numbers per channel in the 10's of millions and you can see that Youtube can compete with television. It might not take up such a large portion of time as television but it is capable in delivering large amounts of views. Amateur, user generated, video content is more than capable of competing with professional television as a form of entertainment. 

# Content Creators Motivation.

The majority of Youtube's content is uploaded by users that receive no financial incentive. The reason they upload content is to share, or as a hobby. Not for financial gain. You could argue that once someone is paid for their content then they are in fact a professional. But an amateur painter can still make the occasional sale and still remain an amateur. Very few Youtubers have made the transition to making Youtube content creation their job. Yet millions of people still upload content for free. 

This content still has value and as the internet is a weird and wonderful place, seemingly throw away bits of content can gather huge amounts of interest. Proof of this can be seen in the fact Charlie bit my finger - Again! as the most used video on Youtube. The success of this video spawned a range of merchandise and the sales have made enough to create a college fund for Charlie. The original uploader of the video had no intention of making money. The video was uploaded just to share the experience with friends and family. It was lucky enough to spread virally. But content can also be created just to amuse the audience that the creator is also a part of. This trend isn't seen as much on Youtube as video content takes a greater effort to create. On websites that have a focus on images though this audience generated content is common.

# The Work of moot - Case Study Two.

In 2003 a bored 15 year old launched a website called 4chan (www.4chan.org). Known online by the simple nickname "moot", this website went on to quickly become a user generated, creative power house behind a large portion of the internets most well known memes. A meme in this case is referred to as an internet joke. Originally it referred to as a "unit of cultural transmission." Richard Dawkins coined the phrase in his book "The Selfish Gene" as a nod to the word gene. He believed that content could go through the process of evolution and that culture was this replication and spreading of these small units of content. 4chan is also home the one of the darkest corners of the internet, the /b/ board. Well known as the "asshole of the internet".

The creative out put of 4chan is born from the structure of the website itself. 4chan is an image board style website. This images are sub divided into sections called boards. Each with their own topic. Users then have the ability to directly upload images or ideas, to the website as a way of starting conversations on these boards. These conversations are called threads, other users can then reply with their own images or text messages. These responses are referred to as posts. Threads are then listed on the board in the order of most recent activity. So as a post to a thread will put the thread at the start of the board, bumping it to the top. As people stop replying and posting in threads they die out and drop down the list till eventually they are deleted. On it's own this simple system was used in countless places across the web. In fact the original source code for 4chan was copied from another website called Futaba Channel, otherwise known as 2chan. The one seemingly small change between these two websites however was a lack of registration system for 4chan. A thread could be made and replied to anonymously on 4chan. 

At the time of 4chans creation social networks were just starting to take off. Myspace was only a few months old and online communities were leaning heavily towards the idea of an online identity. The theory being that any content put online would have an identity attached to it. This would result in a higher quality of content as people would be permanently associated with it. The content would be your responsibility. While 4chan had it's anonymous post system, the sites users themselves clung to the idea of online identities. Users that posted anonymously were referred to as cowards. Other time this sentiment changes and anonymous postings were became more accepted.

This change in attitude towards anonymous posts came about when a new board on 4chan was created. /b/, better known as the random board. This board was a free for all, an anything goes place. One that I advise you to never visit. The top image on the board as I write this is a cartoon drawing of a young woman and involves at least 3 different body fluids and some unusual nipples. As usual this thread was created by an anonymous user. The /b/ board users refer to themselves as /b/tards and amuse themselves with gross out images such as these to try and out do each other. All of this is done from the safety of anonymity. Anything weird, disturbing and gross bares very little risk of being tied back to a certain individual. This content was being created purely for amusement. Users actively tried to out do each other by creating the weird and most disturbing content because they could. Peoples reaction to their work was the only reward for the effort they put in to creation. 

The safety net of anonymity lead for more unusual content being posted on other parts of 4chan. People started sharing creative works and cartoons they had drawn, safe in the knowledge that their rejection couldn't be tied back to them. Silliness was accepted and embraced as long as the audience liked it and reacted positively. As long as it amused someone else the content could be considered a success. If the users joke failed it didn't matter as it wasn't a black mark on their internet permanent record. The bad joke would just drop to the bottom and be deleted. This lead to rapid generation of content, the community selected good content and kept it at the top of the boards. Smarter users took this good content and altered it; they tried to use it as a base to gain more praise from the audience as it was a relatively safe bet to use already successful content. This lead to rapidly evolving content as people were willing to reuse jokes as a short cut to pleasing their audience. This is Dawkins memetic theory in action. Users could even scroll back up the thread and see the steps this process took. You could see the contents evolve. Even successful jokes though would eventual reach the bottom and be deleted, however they would often pop back up at a later date, perhaps with a new spin and this cycle of constant evolution would begin again. If content gained enough popularity on 4chan it would go viral and spread across the web through more mainstream channels such as Facebook, Reddit and Twitter.

Popular content that was being enjoyed by large communities was being created by these very same communities that were creating it. Professional content creators had no say in the creation. It was the users themselves, with no professional experience. They may have used professional grade tools such as photoshop but the work itself was being carried out by amateurs. The safety net of anonymity allowed people to learn, experiment and share with a buffer zone. Negative responses to work could be shrugged of as they weren't tied directly to your identity. Users could learn from the constructive criticism they received and anything else could be ignored. The only payment these creators received was the satisfaction of pleasing their audience.

moot realised how important this user generated content  was to the 4chan community and how it was being used in other sites around the internet. In 2008 moots real name was published by The Wall Street Journal and he quickly rose to fame in technological circles as Christopher Poole. This new fame allowed him to raise investment money and to launch a second website called Canvas (www.canv.as). Canvas is an evolution of 4chan. The same image board concept underlies it but more tools have been put in place to support it. The site contains an in built image editor as it's main selling point. The site however does has a registration system if you wish to add content to the site. To  encourage experimentation a sticker system has also been added where users can place stickers on each others work to praise it. Much like a first school teacher does. These stickers have no real world value, they are just a made up internet scoring system. They just back up this concept of pleasing the audience with your own creation. Similar systems can be seen on other online communities such as Reddit's karma points.

These new systems encourage more people to actually contribute and get involved by keeping the consequences of failure low and reducing barriers to entry. To take part in 4chan's image threads users would need some form of image editor such as photoshop. This functionality is built into Canvas, though at a lower capability and reduces a requirement for participation. This further democratises content creation by removing a barrier to entry. No specialised tools are needed just an everyday computer with an image browser. This always anyone to take part in content creation and the editing and improvement of anyone else's work. The content that rises to the top is democratically chosen and generated by the users themselves. Very little on the site could be referred to as professionally created. It is also created with no financial incentives. Just the reward of entertaining anyone that views it. 

# Greater Value

User generated content doesn't have to just be for entertainment. Open source projects are projects that groups collaborate on collectively. They often have no real leadership and anyone is free to contribute to it. Tools such as Github are used to help organise the changes and combine them into one working project. Open sourced projects can be large in scale such as Linux, which is a computer operating system. Due to the open sources nature ideas and skill sets can be combined in unusual ways. These combinations can have a large impact and can be sources for real change. 

# Wikipedia - Case Study Three.

A wiki according to Wikipedia is "a website which allows its users to add, modify, or delete its content via a web browser usually using a simplified markup language or a rich-text editor. Wikis are powered by wiki software. Most are created collaboratively." The first wiki was created by Ward Cunnington in 1994 when he dreamt up the WikiWideWeb. This project became WikiBase and kicked started the wiki movement. 

Wikipedia is one of the products of the wiki movement; an online encyclopaedia that is editable by anyone willing to create a free account that protects the users anonymity. It has become the first stop in the online quest for knowledge due to it's broad and in-depth information. It is an entirely crowd sourced project with no professional writers paid to contribute. By encouraging a large and diverse user base Wikipedia manages to keep it's self updated and relevant, articles are created within minutes of a news worthy event and are edited in real time as details come in from news sources. This keeps wikipedia current and gives a clear advantage of traditional print based encyclopaedias. 

When an article on wikipedia is edited the past versions are kept and changes to an article are logged in a change log. This stops abuse of articles and reduces people changing things for their own amusement or ulterior motives. If an article goes through a particularly heavy series of edits then an article can be temporarily locked and further changes have to be democratically voted on before they are accepted. The change log also contains a discussion area where users discuss edits and issues. This discussion and debate drives the article towards a neutral conclusion by finding a natural and mutually agreed middle ground. This process reduces bias in the article and removes users opinions. Combine this with the rule that any fact must come with a citation then the outcome of this shared content creation is a polished, edited and accurate piece of writing. 

This collection of amateur writers are able to collaboratively create a professional collection of writing. The content is often created by anonymous user accounts and then these articles are then worked and improved on by more regular wikipedia users. The heavy editing of wikipedia can be attributed by a relatively small group of people. A hardcore audience of approximately 800 people are responsible for around 50% of the edits to wikipedia. These users are known by their anonymous usernames, their writing credentials are unknown and irrelevant. Everyone starts off on the same footing and their work is judged purely on content. A professor from a prestigious university has equal authority as a high school dropout but they also have to prove their knowledge by showing it in the articles and edits they work on. This process encourages anyone to contribute as their is no real barrier to contribution and their contribution is in turn equally valid. By allowing anyone to contribute there is also a knock on effect to the overall content of wikipedia. The articles contain as much information as people feel they need and have a length that is appropriate. The pages evolve and change natural depending on the people that are working on it, there is no control from an editor. Articles are also linked together at the discretion of the user which provide additional related material. These links are built into the article and are more than just footnotes of their print equivalent.

This combined editing process can only happen thanks to the networking effect of the internet. Articles remain constantly editable thanks to the fact they are always connected to the internet and the network of people that work on Wikipedia. The relative cheapness of digital storage versus the cost of printing allow Wikipedia to cover a much larger scale of topics. The digital nature of wikipedia allows it to be made searchable and to be broken down into more categories than any printed encyclopaedia could ever hope to achieve.  Sources can be cited and linked in  the article and are instantly clickable, making themselves instantly available. There is no need to find the reference book or article, a simple click instantly transfers to the relative material and further avenues of knowledge.

This combination of user generated content and technology has left Wikipedia as the most used Encyclopaedia. It's success has  practically killed of the traditional printed encyclopaedia. The gold standard of encyclopaedias was often considered the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Several studies have placed the accuracy of the two encyclopaedias as roughly equal, a recent one found the average mistakes in a Wikipedia article totalled 4 compared to the Encyclopaedia Britannica's 3. A an article can be found on Wikipedia that lists all the errors found in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, these mistakes still remain whereas all the mistakes found in that survey were fixed on Wikipedia within three weeks. This shows the power of a digital content structure, serviced by a large collection of content creators. The traditional approach struggled to compete and in March 2012 the Encyclopaedia Britannica announced it would stop producing paper versions of it's encyclopaedia and instead focus on a digital version. This digital version is in direct competition to Wikipedia and takes advantage of many of the technological advances of Wikipedia but failed to integrate user generated content. The crowd sourced, social experiment had killed off a long running established business model and effectively replaced it. The 244th Edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica was the last printed version. 

# User Generated Graphic Design.

A hacktivist (computer hackers that believe they are carrying out political action by hacking) called Anonymous spawned from the previously mentioned /b/ board of 4chan. This group was a leaderless, unorganised collection of hackers that banded together when they found a cause they believed in enough to take part in. After quickly gaining media interest after their attacks on scientology the group realised they needed some form of branding. As they group had no real leadership they banded together to create a logo and visual branding. This democratic branding process left them with a loose visual identity that was easily recognisable yet flexible enough that anyone could recreate, alter and improve on it. Anyone could take it's recognisable features such as the mask and create their own work from it. This concept fit the nature of the overall collective and it's organisational structure. By creating their own visual identity they also tied themselves to it. This stopped news organisations from imposing one on them, increasing their legitimacy and furthering themselves from the label hacker and it's criminal connotations. A cohesive visual identity was created organically without involvement from a professional graphic designer or branding team.

Advertising agencies quickly embraced the idea of viral marketing. This form of advertising relies on social networks to share the advert. You don't see the advert on tv, you see it as a Facebook post on your friends wall or embedded in an email. Many advertisers try to capture the feel of user generated content by reducing production quality to that of the average Youtube video. The idea being that it leads to a more relatable video. It's not a company talking to you, instead its a fan of the product sharing something cool with you. These adverts are cheaper to make and have the potential to reap a larger audience due to their viral nature. 

An examples of this is an ad titled "Official Ojai Valley Taxidermy TV Commercial" produced by Rhett and Link. A pair of professional Youtubers that specialise in the creation of viral advertisers and are well respected in advertising circles. The advert was a cheesy throwback to self made commercials of the 80's and 90's. Featuring Chuck Testa, his collection of stuffed animals and his "Nope! It's Chuck Testa!" catchphrase. The ad was commissioned as part of their TV show. After being uploaded to Youtube the commercial soon spread virally through social networks and blogs. It currently stands at 13 million view on Youtube and soon established it self as part of internet culture with it's various meme spin off and parody videos. The video it self appears almost tailor made to have this effect. With it's silly premise, quirky catchphrase and low production values it strikes chords with the user generated content of the internet. Rhett and Link encouraged the generation of user generated content creation by faking their own. Nope Remix (Official) is a remixed rap version of the ad with some minor rap stars and the obligatory fake bling. This went on to spawn further alternate remixes from fans and a whole new wave of parodies. Chuck Testa became such an influence on internet culture in 2011 that a video of him appearing from a zebra suit after a short dance gained nearly 5 million views. By encouraging the participation of the audience the advert had a much larger impact than a traditional viral ad. A parody or remix of the ad is still an ad view. The viewer is referred back to the original either because they remember it or they view it again. This keeps the ad campaign fresh and relevant as it's life span is artificially expanded by the user generated content.

Graphic designs have always been content creators. We create pieces of visual communication that help convey a message or meaning to a wider audience. The tools of our trade however have been democratised and widely distributed. Content creation is now such a common act thanks to the aid of technology that the content it's self is in danger of becoming worthless. Content is easily reproduced and shared, copyright is ignored and respecting the source is a rare occurrence on the web. Professional quality isn't always required and is more often unnecessary as the output of amateurs rises in quality. Good enough becomes acceptable as we are exposed to amateur work often enough that we are immune to it. Templated Tumblr blogs have replaced the need for individually designed websites. DSLR and Instagram have given the belief that everyone is a photographer. A copy of photoshop seems to automatically make you a designer. This mass amateurisation has created an excess of content and a larger base of people that believe they are capable creatives and who are we to say they aren't? They have our tools, our software and our tips and tricks after all. 

Designers have to accept this fact and work with it. Our industry is evolving and we can choose to be left behind and stagnate or embrace the change and innovate. We have to face the reality that content creation is quickly becoming easy and anyone can have access to the tools needed to create. We are no longer the sacred keepers of the photoshop. It belongs to the masses. Designers have talked at their audience, we've started to interact with them by allowing them to interact with our work. The next step is to now encourage them to take part in the creation. The audience should not be thought of passive viewers but as active participators. By encourage creation of content we can engage the audience in the act of creation. Design moves pass a simple viewing experience and into an engaging creative process, that benefits the professional and the amateur.




 

